Now you're a clue.
Are we doing The menstrual development?
We could doing the, the what? This?
Yeah, yeah. Yeah. 30 minutes. Yeah.
Do they want to come up?
Well, good morning and welcome.
Uh, we have half an hour this morning, first with, uh,
ministry social development to discuss the
Officer Orders General's report on the effect
of arrangements for reducing child poverty.
Um, followed by half an hour scheduled
with the Social Investment Agency
to discuss the same, so committee.
Um, and then we'll sort that afterwards.
Say, look, welcome and, um, the time is yours.
We can open comments and any questions we have from members.
Um, but please, please.
Um, thank you. Good morning. Um, I am Simon McPherson.
I'm the DC policy at MSD,
and I'd just like to briefly introduce my colleague.
So on my left is Sasha oday, who's DC Strategy Insights.
Um, my right is, uh, Hannah K's, director
of the Child Wellbeing and Popular Reduction Unit, um, MSD,
and Brian Perrys, the principal advisor in Sasha's area.
Um, the Child Wellbeing
and Poverty Unit moved to MSD May April last year.
So, um, before it was at DPMC.
Um, and the group's role as sort
of leadership one across government, um,
that advises on monitors and champions, uh,
and acts as a steward for the,
the Child Poverty Reduction Act
and the strategy produced under the Children's Act.
Um, of course, many of the leavers
and actions that relate to child poverty,
which across all the government, uh,
sit with other agencies.
So it is a sort of a leadership and stewardship role.
Um, we had a really constructive relationship
with the auditors through the, um, this process, um,
and commented on various drafts and recommendations, uh,
and really pleased to see a number
of the positive conclusions.
I think such as that the measuring
and reporting has done well and regularly,
and this is valued by stakeholders.
There are clear roles and responsibilities
among ministers and agencies.
Um, the key agencies are working together well,
and that many of the foundations are in place.
Perhaps the most important conclusion, though,
is the one which is a bit buried in the text itself,
which is so far, all requirements in legislation
to define set targets for, monitor
and report on the measures and indicators have been met.
Um, we noted the oags encouragement for, for agencies
to continue improving communications with the public,
given the complexities on the reporting.
And we don't disagree with that,
and we've taken some steps to try and do that.
But it is a challenge given the nu
the number of the measures.
Um, the audit span quite a long period of time.
It started, I think in the middle of 2023,
signed a previous government reflected, uh, a set
of arrangements and a set of priorities, uh, of that time.
Uh, and one of the things we've done that
to wood along the way is to try
and bring up speed with how things have changed through, uh,
inside government itself.
Um, uh, one thing I I will say is
that I'm now through, um, throughout the process was that,
um, aspects of the recommendations go beyond
what we consider to be the role of the audited agencies
and a ministerial parliamentary mandate would be required
to give a full effect to them.
Um, for example,
we think having an integrated implementation plan
of the sort and whether their is a question
for ministers rather than officials.
Similarly, um, housing governments arrangements, uh,
Sorry, could, could you just, uh, try
and speak up a little bit, just a little bit hard far end.
So, um, our, now view it throughout was that aspects
of recommendations go beyond what were the responsibilities
of the audited agencies
and really sat with by the ministers or parliament.
So, for example, having a implementation plan of the sort
and Visa by the recommendations actually seems
to be a decision for ministers rather than
for officials to make.
Uh, similarly, the high governance arrangements are really
ministerial choices, but MS teachers can't decide on not
what, how it's gonna work in state sector.
Um, the work on the report, um,
evolved alongside the development of the new child,
a new strategy, and, um, I think as it turns out,
that's quite aligned with aspects of the report.
So one
of the strategies priorities is on reducing child material
hardship, uh, with a focus of driving drives
of long-term disadvantage and hardship.
Uh, we've developed an action plan for ministers
that maps actions and work programs against the strategy
priorities, um, in sports agency
and ministerial coordination and oversight.
Uh, Kevin agreed to cross-agency accountable
to achieve improvements, uh,
in the child PO related indicators over time.
The governance arrangements include the child
and youth ministers group to provide oversight the strategy.
It operates as a forum to monitor progress on the strategy
and monitor progress across o other key plans
and work programs that have
implications across the children's system.
There are three further governance levels.
So there's a social sector seas group,
there's a DCS group and a GMs group.
Um, and some of the stakeholders we engaged
with on a regular basis include, uh, tangata,
the Children's commissioner,
and a range of Phil philanthropic organizations,
academics and NGOs.
Um, and I'll stop there.
Uh, thank you very much. I, I might just, um,
start the question, uh, just,
I'm just in the recommendations
that the officer order General
made page seven of the report.
Uh, there three, one in particular about working
with other organizations on integrated implementation plan
to reduce child material hardships
and out initials should be sequenced and coordinated
and ensuring, uh, across agency governance, uh,
sufficiently focused on effective coordination
of child poverty initiatives.
And then the third one, strengthening engagement
with Maori other population groups
and relevant community organizations.
Um, I'm just interested in what work, um,
your agency is doing and,
and how that affects also
with the central investing agency Sure.
And, and their, um, uh, plan to address that sort of,
I guess, that cross integrion piece.
Sure. Um, so I think, um,
the main things we've been doing in the space have been the
development of the strategy and the action plan below,
which is the actions ministers have agreed to give effect
to the strategy and, um,
providing feedback to ministers on that.
This, in terms of the first recommendation, um, uh,
um, and I'll just come back to the point
of the social investment agency.
Um, in terms of the governance arrangements, um,
the ministers have put in place the, um,
the child ministers, sorry, the child youth ministers group,
and like that there are a set of senior officials groups
that feed into that minister group.
So there's this ministers agreed set
of government estrangements, which cover a range of things
to do with the children, including the strategy
and the action plan that sits under that.
Um, in terms of the social investment agency, um, I'm,
my colleagues will be able to speak from themselves.
Um, from our point of view, there's very close alignment
between the social investment approach, the establishment
of the agency and the fund and the strategy.
Um, there's a strong focus on children in terms
of the initial priority cohorts in under the social
investment fund.
Um, and, um, my way of putting it,
and the, uh, agency will have a better way of putting this.
I think part of the intentions of fund is to try
and get it difficult issues with, um, uh, people
with high needs who've got any crosscut sport in the funders
and endeavor to actually put in place certain arrangements
to try and support those people in a different
way and test different approaches.
And is there, um, a, a formal mechanism you have in place
for that relationship between the social inducement agency
and and your agency
of the over overarching responsible agency?
Uh, or how, how does that work?
Um, we have, I think,
regularly contacting the Friday governance forms where we,
we both are represented.
So do you want talk this? Yeah,
I was just gonna say the social investment agency is part
of all of those levels of governance.
Um, so whether it's in the child
and youth ministers in the, um,
in the social sector CE group and in the DCE group
and the GM groups.
So we are working together closely
through those governance arrangements.
And Hannah, is there anything you wanna
add on the day-to-day work?
Yeah, there are some particular pieces of work
that we engage more closely with SIA on.
So in budget 25, for example, there was, um,
some funding announced to support, uh,
positive parenting practices, um, which, uh, was part of
that social investment, um, package announcement,
but which very strongly aligns with, um,
the first 2000 days priority under
the child and youth strategy.
So as Sasha says, governance levels,
but also, um, day-to-day more specific pieces of work.
Thank you, arda.
Thank you. I've just got a handful of questions,
particularly on the comments
provided by the OAG on page four and recommendation one.
Um, so has m Ms D at any point advised
that any government policies, uh, would increase
child material hardship?
Um, we've provided advice on a range
of initiatives, yes. Um,
But I'm specifically asking, have you advised
that at any point, um,
government policies could increase child material hardship?
Um, uh, yes, I think so.
So an example that that comes to mind is the changes
to the way in which main benefits were indexed just
before budget 24.
So I think we, um, advise ministers on the, um,
the likely increase child poverty, um,
and I think those, that information was published
as part of budget documentation. So yes, we
Do. And the reason why I
ask this is
because do you consistently, uh, create analysis on pieces
of legislation that affects children on how it may
affect child material hardship rates or otherwise?
For example, I don't recall seeing that in the changes to,
um, accommodation supplement, um, entitlements.
There was some commentary about the need
to access additional hardship assistance.
But for example, I don't see MSD providing
specific analysis on consistently
on child material hardship. And do you think you should?
Um, well, two things.
I think we endeavor to consistently provide
advice on the impact
of various policies on different population groups.
One practical complication which we face is that, uh,
from a systemwide point of view, the, um, modeling
of child poverty impacts is actually done by treasury
through its tawa model, which we
think some can sometimes access, get access to,
but it, it's, um, heavily prioritized to things that matter
for the Ministry of Finance and Treasury.
So we don't always have access to it.
So we, uh, for some of the work, we have access
to the T model and we'll include that.
In other cases, we'll give administrative advice on the, um,
what we think of like the impacts on different population
groups, including households with children.
But we won't need to be able
to model it in the same way we can if we don't
have access to the table model.
But so independent on whether you think you can model or
otherwise, do you think particularly in relationship to, uh,
recommendation one, um, if you're not
dedicating a specific part
of your analysis on child material hardship, how will, um,
public organizations actually be able
to create an integrate implementation plan
to reduce child material hardship if you don't know
how government policies impact child
material hardship or otherwise?
But we actually do try to look at that for any
of the major policies that we engage
with or provide advice on.
My point about the measurement is we can't actually
necessarily model those if, if we don't have access
to the treasury modeling capacity.
I've got a, um, sort of kind
of a supplementary question on that actually,
because on page five of the Auditor General's report,
it says that it's not clear
how many current plan initiatives
and sequence all coordinated with each other or rather,
and frontline services such as health and
or housing services support efficient
delivery and maximize benefits.
Um, and the Water General's view what's needed is the
integrated implementation plan, reducing child
material hardship that clarifies this.
And if we look over at page 15, it says
that there are four agencies playing central roles.
Department of the Prime Minister, cabinet
SD is the lead agency, s New Zealand worked together
with the government, uh, uh, statistician and then treasury.
And now you have, uh, the social investment agency.
So you sort of say there's five agencies in, uh, playing,
or four key ones in, in a in a fifth one playing space.
How, how are you going to be able to coordinate
with different pieces to address that concern
that the auditor General Express got an integrated
implementation plan, coordinate across
those different pieces of work?
And, and keep in mind that there's a lot of
other smaller agencies and,
and, um, voluntary agencies operating in the sector
and across our communities.
Um, I guess two or three points.
So one is, um, in a sense the four
or five major agencies
that the audit officer general focused on are the ones
that are responsible for, uh, setting targets, reporting,
developing strategy, reporting on the strategy, so that
that's a strategy development,
reporting measurement set of functions,
which we're actually closely engaged
with each other on in general.
So I think there are strong working relationships
between all, all agencies historically
who have trying to do that as well as possible.
Now the unit is shifting to SD from DPMC, so as one less
major department involved, um, I think the coordination
of actual policies
and, um, implementation, those depends a bit on the context.
So see there is an action plan which provides an overview
of all of the things that are intended to contribute
to the strategy, which ministers users a working document.
Um, beyond that, the implementation
of the policies will depend a bit on the policy itself in
terms of who needs to be involved and how that's gonna work.
I mean, given the, in a sense, um, much of
what happens in the economy and society will affect the
wellbeing of households and the children.
Um, so it's impossible to try
and coordinate everything all at once in one place.
And, uh, excuse my ignorance,
but that you mentioned, I think modeling, was it,
Could you just, treasury is a general EQU model,
which we've used for a long period of time to,
so it's used across governance.
So it's used by us, by IRD by treasury itself,
but by other agencies to try and model it.
Um, both the cost but also the impacts of various policies.
And those are impacts in terms of which people are affected,
um, how much they're affected,
what are the child poverty
impacts that like you like to see.
And so that's the, the basic model
that's used across government for trying
to model child poverty impacts of major policy changes.
Um, but it's,
there's actually limited capacity for the model.
So it gets prioritized on statutory responsibilities
and things that matter to the Ministry
of Financing Treasury, um,
and it can't model certain things.
So just to, um, to add to that is the, the tax
and welfare analysis model, um, in relation
to child poverty, it can model the
income-based poverty measures.
It doesn't model material hardship.
So material hardship is about whether
or not families have access to basic things.
So it's not income based.
So there's this, there's a relationship
between material hardship
and both the income poverty measures, particularly the
after housing costs one.
So we use that as a proxy
to understand likely impacts on material hardship,
but it doesn't model material hardship itself.
So those, um, fraud primary measures required
by the Child Poverty Reduction Act that, uh,
mentioned on page 12 of,
or general report, uh, the BHC 50
to a HC 50 material hardship and persistent poverty.
Um, does that, does that term model feeding feed into those?
No, um, so those, um, measures, um, uh,
statistics New Zealand collects the information, um,
for those measures, um, that the tower model kind
of takes those outputs
and then adjusts the variables depending on the policy
that's being modeled to understand what the impact
of a particular policy would be if it was implemented.
So the tail model is more about trying
to estimate the impact of different policy settings
or policy changes in advance
and go, well, actually how many people like be affected?
Uh, will they gain or lose?
Um, what will the impact on child poverty be?
So it's a forward looking guess, I guess in a, in a informed
by estimate that stats is modeling
in a backward looking sense,
the measured poverty levels use using survey data about
people's actual experience.
So they're two different things, but they complement in
terms of package responses to child poverty. But
That, that, um, if IAnd you quickly,
you don't feel you have enough a access
all the time to that tail?
Well, no, it's, um, it's a scarce resource and, um, Hannah
or Brian might wanna comment on this,
but it's, um, my experience is that you can get access to it
to some extent for priority issues across government,
but, um, otherwise you may not be able to get access to it.
So we don't necessarily assume we'll have access to it,
which is the random advice on
particular policies or changes.
The other key thing that it's used
for is the child poverty budget report.
So on budget night, um, uh,
on budget day every year there is a child poverty budget
report published, and it, um,
and it talks about the impact of the budget package
on child poverty rates.
And so that, um, that is one of the key
uses in the child poverty space.
So again, it, it doesn't, it can't, um, estimate the impact
of all, um, uh, initiatives,
but those that are expected
to have a direct impact on incomes, um, which then flow
through to those income-based poverty rates will be modeled.
Ask one, oh, sorry, by the
Budget report that treasury producers,
which Hannah referred to, will include both, uh,
backward looking stats information.
They will have projections based on the tail modeling
and using the stats data
about what they think is gonna happen.
I might just ask one last question on the,
on this little data data,
but it's slight shift the focus a, a able
to use the integrated data infrastructure data at all, uh,
for, for either granular or integrated work streams.
Um, we use IDI data, um,
more broadly across, um, the strategy, um, in relation
to some of the sort of broader wellbeing questions.
Um, we, uh, haven't used it specifically in relation to,
um, child poverty rates, um, themselves.
Is there anything Yes, the, the idea I is used
by Statue of New Zealand to, um, yes, some,
some elements of the income that households experience
and have, uh,
and I just started doing that about five years ago.
But the material wellbeing, the material hardship, um,
information is direct from survey, whereas the income
is from survey plus the IDI,
and then when it it comes to getting the weights together
to move from the sample to the actual population estimates,
then, um, the IDI information is used for that.
And, uh, like towards the end of October, that's the, yeah,
end of October, there's an IDI refresh as they call it,
which then allows Statue New Zealand to develop its weights
to, um, get ready for the 2026
February release of the child poverty numbers.
Um, so it's fairly tight, a little timeframe there for them,
but that's one way the idea is used
on this fairly narrow conceptualization of poverty
about having incomes sort of too low
or the experience of, um,
all your resources leading you to have a, a living standard
that's too low, which is a, a, a pretty,
a narrow conceptualization of poverty and hardship,
but one that is internationally used
and it's, um, uh, the, the I a,
I'm sure we'll talk about it, a sort
of a broader conceptualization of multiple disadvantage,
which is not what, um, these measures are about.
Thank you. Now I've got a few, a few questions,
but I just, are they, are they supplementaries or prior?
I Have a sub as well.
Okay. Alright. So I, I'm a little bit fuzzy about the,
the issue here with this modeling that you can't get access
to, um, that modeling is treasuries modeling
tool that is available
and they are prioritizing where it's used.
Well, I, I wouldn't wanna make more of this than it is.
So basically it's a tool they've developed, they operate,
we get access to it for certain types of things.
Yes, I can see you do for some Yeah.
But you need more access to it. Well,
Um, I think the system as whole would benefit from more,
more, but actually that's a, a resourcing thing.
And the, also the, not particularly my area,
but the capacity to do this is limited in terms
of the sort of people who can do this.
So you can't just decide
It would come from somewhere else. It has
To be developed and built up.
You can't just decide we'll spend a bit more
on it and then Right. Turn a switch, if that makes sense.
You wouldn't have the people to do it. Yeah.
And it would have to come from not
using the same people somewhere
Else. You'd have to build the capability
out,
which treasury has been doing over time. But,
But if this is our priority,
and then part of this committee's job is to think
actually this is something that needs,
Um, Priority Potentially.
I mean, I think,
um, as Hannah said, one
of the things treasury uses it for is to actually do the,
the, um, budget related.
Yes. So the budget report on child poverty related issues,
particularly the impact of budget budget measures.
So it's, they're using it
for related purposes in some cases,
but they will use a full range of other,
Is it stringing you not having this information?
That would be, um, I think it would,
it would be preferable to have more access to it.
Okay. Thank you. Does that make sense?
Um, Laura, Um, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, I guess my question,
I just wanna understand a little bit more about the
statistics and where you pulled those from.
And like you mentioned that the scope is really small
and it's income based,
but does it include, um, like b, CE subsidies, um, you know,
like other winter energy?
Like does, does it include that or is it just income based?
So it would include the winter energy payment. Okay.
That's count as part of income? Yes. Yeah.
And the, the impact of various subsidies comes
through when the effect of
that is added to the effect of income.
Okay. That's where material hardship is a really good
measure because it takes everything into account, including
how well households actually manage
and spend their money spend thrift versus loose
and all like that.
Yeah. So, um, in terms of the income though, either the,
the energy payment and as,
and all that accounted as part of income,
And just, so just to add to that,
and yeah, Brian, correct me if I'm wrong.
So this is based heavily on surveyed stats do so mm-hmm.
Stats will ask the household how much income they've got
and what their experience is.
So, and they may not be that clear about
how much is the winter energy payment.
So it's not done by getting information from M Ms D about
how much people receive, it's actually got on the base
of sta sizing about their experience and their income.
Yeah. Asking people about receiving. Yeah. Okay.
Supplementary Ricardo,
What would need to change for you to have access
on a reliable basis to the tertiary modeling so
that you can better provide advice
on child material hardship when legislation is
being presented in front of us?
Well, um, Think Simon said Taylor doesn't do modeling
of material hardship
Or child poverty impacts.
In fact, it is just like most agencies around the world,
there are, there aren't really any good models
that can model material hardship rates
And Prediction. But when I asked
to clarify, when I asked earlier, you know,
about the advice, I got told
that the treasury model would be needed
and clarify what would need to change.
So we, the treasury, use the treasury model for
modeling the income poverty.
And so the, um, what, what it means in terms of before and
after housing house incomes households have,
so sorry if I was unclear about that
And what we need to change for you
to reliably have access to that too.
Well, I think, Um, make that analysis more robust.
It's basically a, it's a resourcing
constraint largely, I think.
Good question. Um, Lauren,
Uh, thanks very much.
Um, in the Auditor General's report, um,
or when the report was being written, he noted
that officials were considering further changes
to government governance arrangements.
And can I, can I start
by saying congratulations on the feedback
that's in the report about the interagency relationships
and the outcomes from that.
Um, are you aware of any changes that have been made
as a result of seeing this?
Well, I think, um, in parallel for this report be done,
ministers and officials were
putting a range of things in place.
So when start colleagues put in place the ministerial group,
which, um, is overseeing issues to do with children which go
beyond the strategy
or child poverty, other types of issues as well.
And then their range of senior officials groups below that,
so is a DCS group, which has been reformed, um, sorry,
a SEAS group, which has been reformed, a DCS group.
So there a set of layers of governance below that.
Um, obviously a significant, uh,
change was the, um, action plan,
which I think is probably not
in play when the report was being information collected.
And then a major change has obviously been established
with the social investment agency and the fund
and its relationship to, uh,
the rest of us and to the strategy.
So there've been some quite significant changes
made, I think in the last year. Anything you wanna add?
Um, I think the action plan is the key thing.
So, um, as Simon said in his introductory remarks,
we worked, um, sort of backwards and forwards with the OAG
because the report was developing in tandem
with the work on the strategy
and then the things that fell outta that.
But, um, I think at the point that the report was finalized,
we were developing the action plan
and the approach to, um, reporting to ministers on that.
So that was a process, um,
involving all the agencies whose ministers are represented
on the, um, child and youth ministers group,
and a couple of other portfolios as well, to
identify the key actions, not all the actions,
because obviously there is a huge range of
activity across government that impacts in different ways
on, um, reducing child poverty.
But the, the, the key actions that, um, that, that sort
of organize themselves under the three priorities,
including reducing material hardship.
So, um, there's a range of actions sitting with MSD
with the Ministry of Education, with Housing
and Urban Development that, that broadly speaking, reflect,
um, both the government's focus on addressing the, the sort
of longer term drivers of, um, uh,
of material hardship,
but also addressing, uh, the immediate, um,
the immediate needs.
So different ways to, um, support families
with the costs that they're facing.
Um, and then that is reported on quarterly to ministers, um,
with a focus on identifying, um, anything that is off track
that ministers need to, um, engage with to unblock
and so that they can sort of see
how those things are tracking.
And that would also be the opportunity if there were
key dependencies between actions, we would absolutely flag
that in that reporting.
Um, and so, um, that, that, um, process,
uh, was put in place after the report
Was finalized.
Um, um,
and, um, look, I recall, um, how challenging it was
to come up with those measures
and those targets at the time of the initial,
uh, legislation.
And I, and I can hear, um, how much, um,
intense work goes on and to collecting that data
and then, you know, feeding that through
to policy development.
But in terms of, and this is just an opinion I'm asking
from, from you guys in terms of the amount of resource
that's involved in gathering all that data
and feeding it through, are we starting to see outcomes
as a consequence of all of that?
So I, I guess, um, is the investment in time, effort,
energy, um, ha having payback at the end of the day?
That's a, a really big question.
Um, sorry, I guess it'd answer that in, um, several ways,
which might only be a partial answer.
Um, and I'll get to your outcomes question at the end.
So I think, um, obviously set stature responsibilities on
are hugely important topic.
So, um, I think everyone's invested in doing that work
and delivering the reporting to the best of our ability.
So, uh,
and then I think quite a lot
of this work was being done anyway.
So Brian's been working in this field
for more than 20 years,
and, um, I think stats have put some effort into improving
the surveys, and that's actually a lot of the basic, uh,
work was being done anyway through process
that Brian was responsible for.
Um, I think if you look at the trajectory over the last
15 years in terms of child poverty, you see a, um, quite
distinct trend downwards, um, most,
for the most part across the three, uh, target measures, um,
from the end of the GFC.
So when we had employment rates at, well,
unemployment rates, well over 6%,
so you said a decline across all of those, uh,
which is really positive, um,
until about an affliction point shortly
after COVID about 21, 22,
when it's some things gone the wrong direction.
So I think you can actually measure it
and see quite a significant impact.
And that reflects a range of things,
not just policy choices the government's made,
but actually how the economy is
feared and how employment's going.
So I think, um, it gives you a, and just finally, I,
because of the, um, again, reminds you around mind
because of the, um, margins of error in the reporting.
It's actually important to still look at the trend rather
than just a point by point change, I think.
But you can certainly see a quite a significant shift in the
last 15 years in a largely positive way.
And then with reflection up, up
after that, um, Hannah Brian section, anything there?
I, I, I guess what you're saying is that,
that the data is showing a trend,
but is it a result of the effort that's going in
and collating all of
that information and feeding it through?
Oh, and are, are your resources better Spence, elsewhere?
Oh, and that's a good question, but it's quite a big one.
I think, uh, in general, uh,
all governments have actually found the information on the
impacts of policy choices really valuable.
So who's this gonna benefit? Is anybody gonna lose?
What does this mean for children in, um,
house low income households?
So I think that's actually been important
and influential, uh, as one
of the inputs into decision making by successive government.
So I think if I think back
to Prime Minister Key's government, and this was
before was this regime was in place that, that
the child hardship package they put in place was actually
influenced by the data from people like Brian
about who would benefit.
So I think, uh, it is actually I important source
of information from a both, um, assessing how we're going
and how it's going for the people who are doing it tough,
but also, uh, to inform government decision making.
What now we need to move on to, um, next, I just,
one last question, I won't just quickly ask May maybe it's
for you because I'm just wondering, um,
if there's more opportunity to use that, uh, IDI data, uh,
you know, 'cause there, there are some challenges with, with
that data, you know, particularly
around privacy and what whatnot.
So I'm just wondering if there are potentially more
opportunities to utilize that
To use the IDI more?
Yeah, Well, stats certainly are with,
um, they no longer rely on surveys
as the prime source of income information.
And so there's a much improved accuracy there as well as,
um, they're having a larger sample.
So the accuracy has improved to reduce sample error as well.
But, um, in, in terms of the IDI, um,
we've, uh, recently done an exercise on, on having a look,
uh, got a contract to have a look at material hardship
more through using the IDI,
but I, I think it's this I a more into the IDI.
Okay. And, uh, maybe you could ask them,
but we certainly, um, use results
that others have created out
of their work on the IDI most definitely.
Uh, and it's certainly used widely, um,
beyond the job poverty and material hardships stats to try
and assess impact of policies to, to, um,
look at, uh, population groups.
You're interested in cohort. So it's widely used across
government for a range of other purposes as well.
But I think our colleagues can probably talk to that.
Well, thank you much for your time.
Thank you.
We now move to the social investment and, uh, welcome.
Um, welcome to Andrew and your team. Thank you.
So thank, thank you for here this morning.
And we also, um, love
to hear your initial, initial thoughts.
Um, give those, give it, give those to us,
and then we'll same format and move on
to questions once you've, um,
Thank you. Thank you
Chair ov the committee.
Um, great to be with you here this morning.
Just, um, with me is Afra Green,
who is our DCE system performance investment advice.
So looks after our engagement
with government on topics like this, uh,
acknowledge colleagues from the MSD
and the presentation they've given in their role in,
in leading, uh, government response
to reduce child material hardship.
Uh, I understand that our presence here comes out
of a question of sort of how does social investment connect
with this broader picture?
And really pleased to speak to you about that today.
Um, the role of the SIA has been, uh, a evolving
and we are now a central agency with a role
to lead change in the public sector, uh, particularly, uh,
in relation to how data
and evidence are used to improve social outcomes, uh,
from the way we invest funds.
Um, that's a reasonably broad remit.
Uh, we're a small agency, uh,
and we have areas of focus which I'll, I'll come onto, uh,
shortly just to note that, uh, child poverty connects
with, uh, a range of other disadvantage, which are areas
where we are particularly focused.
Um, so whilst social investment is not directly focused on
child poverty, it does, um, touch on population groups
who will feature significantly in child poverty statistics.
Um, probably the key document, uh, for us
to reference in this context is the child news strategy, uh,
which calls out, uh, a number of areas of focus
or priority areas for investment, um, those being
to reduce child material hardship, uh, supporting children
and their families in whanau in the first 2000 days, uh,
which is dear to our heart in terms of, uh,
moving investment earlier in order to prevent harm, uh,
preventing child harm and addressing drivers
of long-term disadvantage.
So how does social investment, uh, touch on these things?
Well, firstly, ensuring that data
and evidence underpin investment decisions.
Uh, we have a wealth of, uh,
data available sometimes too much.
Um, it's our job to make sure that it is used to, uh,
inform decisions, uh, that resources are directed to
where they can have the greatest impact.
Um, government invests a huge amount.
Not all of it is deployed to things
that will make the best difference.
Uh, investments focus on outcomes
for people rather than outputs.
Um, you'll be very well familiar with our system
of accountability, um, which is driven out of the reforms
of the eighties and nineties.
It can see us pretty focused on activity, uh,
and not focused enough on the results of that activity.
And social investment is aimed at trying to, to shift that,
um, ensuring that communities are able to, um, input
and the shape of, to the shape of services that delivered so
that they meet local needs.
Um, ensuring that providers have stability, uh,
that they need and the flexibility to be able
to deliver services that meet the needs
of the people they work with.
Um, ensuring that we're prioritizing early intervention
prevention and innovation, uh,
and ensuring, uh, particularly the sort of high
and complex end of need
that services are responsive to the individual.
Um, and what will make the greatest difference.
As I've said, we, we know that there's a, a, a coalescence
between, um, drivers of long-term disadvantage
and child poverty.
Uh, we primarily work in the IDI, uh,
and that, uh, has been noted, doesn't have all of the, uh,
inputs to the child poverty measures.
Um, but what we are confident about is that the disadvantage
that we're particularly focused on, um,
does significantly aligned.
The social investment fund is one of the, uh, key things
that we are focused on at the moment.
Uh, it is about, um, demonstrating, enabling, uh,
portfolio neutral investment that addresses as early
as possible the causes of, uh, disadvantage
and poor social outcomes.
Um, for the funds first round of investments,
we have identified three, uh, cohorts, uh,
where there will be significant overlap with, um,
child material hardship.
Uh, the cohorts are children of parents, um,
with parents in prison, uh, children of parents
who have experienced the care system
and children who are stood down
or suspended by the age of 12.
You know, as you can imagine, these are are young people
who have, um, a lot stacked against them.
Uh, and we are really focused on making investments
that will try and shift the dial for, uh, young people in
that category very quickly.
In terms of our role, um, as I've said,
you're a central agency.
Uh, we have a role to look across the social sector, um,
that's in the vicinity of 70
or $80 billion worth of spend, um, necessarily we have
to focus in particular areas.
And I'm happy to deepen a bit more for you.
The, the current focus we have, if that's helpful.
Um, we are interested in cross-cutting action.
Uh, there's obviously a lot of delivery that's very focused
around individual agency accountabilities and functions.
Uh, whereas for families
that are experiencing significant disadvantage, uh, it's
how all of that comes together for them to make a difference
that, uh, is most important.
We have some cam, uh, cabinet mandated functions,
which is really about overseeing standards
for social investment, uh, assisting agencies to be able
to apply a social investment approach, leading reviews
of spend in the social sector,
providing cross system advice, uh, generating insights
and tools that will enable better decision making, um,
advising ministers on investments, particularly those
to be delivered through the fund, um,
and making sure we've got the necessary infrastructure
around data and evidence to enable social investment.
Uh, I can talk in more detail about the fund if
that's helpful, but I'm conscious of time
and leaving space for the committee, so I'll stop there
and, uh, rock the questions.
Thank you. Well, Mike, again, um,
and, uh, thank you for that 'cause
and very interest in the data and evidence that piece,
and also how that intersects with, um, outputs
versus is outcomes.
Mm-hmm. And, uh,
something this committee's heard quite a bit is, is
that over the last, um, couple of years,
and I think it's a general agreement
that we wanna be focus on outcomes as opposed to outputs.
Mm-hmm. I think sometimes it's, there's a bit
of a difficulty in identifying actually
what those outcomes are and what good actually looks like.
Yeah. And we are dealing in a complex space with people
with complex backgrounds, complex needs,
and it's, you know, difficult through, you know,
can be quite a graduated process to get to Yeah.
What good might be,
but how, how are you, um, working on
that quite challenging piece Yeah.
That data and evidence and, and identify good looks like.
Yeah. Yeah. I think, um, important to say
that this is complex
and, uh, the FEC select committee, as you'd know,
is grappling with sort of the question
of performance measurement and how it's improved.
And there've been lots of approaches taken over time to try
and, uh, get a better focus on outcomes.
Um, the current system's not bad when it comes to measuring,
um, account, you know, giving accountability
and are the outputs
that are needed in a particular portfolio being delivered.
Um, and where we see
that working well is probably in the 80% of the population
that is generally doing okay, has simple needs, can access
what they need from a particular portfolio.
Uh, whereas for the 20% of the population
that has varying degrees of challenge
and disadvantage, uh, it doesn't work as well, um,
because simple policy prescription from Wellington, uh,
won't necessarily meet the reality of, of their need,
um, when it's complex.
So we use the IDI to, um, understand
outcomes attribution can be difficult, um,
because, you know, families
that are in this space will be experiencing service from
many different organizations.
Um, where we are commissioning specific services
through the social investment fund, we're able to, um,
track whether as a result of that service, uh,
can we see a shift in, um, the lives
or life trajectory of the people who, who received it.
Um, again, to, to get attribution, you need a,
a decent volume of,
of people receiving a particular service.
So it's difficult, but it shouldn't stop
us, uh, from trying.
And I, I think it's how we orient, uh, more towards outcomes
to recognize that the same old activity might not get us to
where we, where we want to go.
Did you want to,
Um, I think just to, uh, add to that the, uh,
social investment fund, uh, ministers responsible
for the fund have agreed the priority outcomes for the fund,
and those are necessarily set at a very high level,
but those are the cross-cutting outcomes, uh, that, uh,
over time we would expect to see shifts towards, uh,
from the new investments in the fund.
And just to supplement on that, um,
and an important point I think you made is about the,
you know, number of different agencies that are interacting
with say a, a given family, um, and you in terms of data
and evidence and the difficulty attribution to, you know,
where, where the changes are coming from.
Is it in your remit to, to look at the complexity of
that environment for that family?
Uh, because what, what truck rolls is, is a issue
that gets raised with me filling off by social agencies
where, you know, there's a, there's a lot
of well-meaning people who are, you know,
they've got a remit to roll up the door
and to deliver X service,
and then they one, deliver y service
and the families get overwhelmed.
Um, yeah. And,
and their, their whole time's taken up
with definitely dealing with different agencies
who are well-meaning and delivering important services,
but there's no integration between Yeah.
Them or little integration between them.
From, from my perspective and,
and in my experience, this is the most significant
opportunity to, uh, shift, uh, families' experience
of government when they are having a
high level of interaction.
Um, and it's finding the balance
between the functional delivery of services
through portfolios for those of us
who have relatively simple needs
and can access what we, what we need through those services.
And then the joining up in delivery for those
who don't access what they need through the way government,
um, reaches them.
The promise here, I think is in community-based delivery,
and we see lots of organizations that are trying to join
this up normally in the face of many contracts
with many different agencies.
Uh, and those contracts don't meet in the middle in terms
of giving those organizations the flexibility
to deliver services to those families.
Um, the social investment fund is aiming to
shift more funding towards
cross-cutting delivery focused on outcomes
with greater flexibility
for the organizations delivering the services
and those, those being community organizations
rather than government.
Um, and I guess proving out that that is an effective way
to work for, for families that have more complex need.
Let's turn sort of onto a supplement.
Okay. Well Supplement, sorry.
It's about that community, uh, stuff like what it, it's the,
I've got community and voluntary portfolio for labor
and, um, I've been really interested in that issue
of an ecosystem.
We had a very critical report come
through on the funding issues, um, for ot.
Um, and I wondered how much room is there in
what you doing for structural
decisions about how to create, um, Voyant
workforces 'cause they're the same people.
Mm-hmm. Right? Mm-hmm.
Um, and ecosystems that are sort of safe
to provide and innovate.
How much is that in your brief?
I've never really understood.
Yeah. I, we, um, recognize that if we want
to achieve a shift in social outcomes, something has
to change in the way delivery occurs.
It's not just, um, how the money is spent, it's, it's how
that gets, um, deployed to enable, uh, people
who are well placed to work effectively in places, uh,
with the people who who have need.
And, um, there's a tension of course between, um,
ministerial and portfolio accountability on specific
activities in a function versus how you help, uh,
families in a place, um, to do, to do better.
And it, it does require government letting go.
Uh, and I use government, small g government letting go, uh,
of some of the control that we like
to exercise from an agency perspective
to allow greater community delivery.
Uh, and it won't always be perfect
and it won't always be pretty,
but if we want better outcomes, then we need
to be willing to take more risk.
And, and I think that is to this point of
how you create local agency.
Right. Just the risk thing, if you can elaborate, I,
I think this is really interesting.
Um, there's the work by Mariana Mascato
that talks about the need for the public to understand
that risk must be taken and there must be failures
and there must be tolerance.
Mm-hmm. Can you talk about that a little bit in this area?
Yeah, absolutely. The way our system works,
individuals carry accountability when things go wrong
and success is dispersed.
Mm-hmm. Uh,
and so we, um, set up our systems
and I, I I use, we a broad sense, you know,
government agencies, that's natural for us
to set up our systems to manage risk to an acceptable level.
Uh, which, which, and, and
because of what I've just said, it sees us
motivated to keep that quite small.
Um, I think it's how does the system respond,
uh, when things go badly
because we took a risk recognizing
that sometimes taking a risk is necessary
to get the broader better outcome that we all want.
Thank you. That's great. I remember that one.
Arda, to what extent did you factor in, um,
child material hardship as an outcome when making decisions?
We, we know there's a really tight alignment between, um,
a wide range of disadvantage that
that social investment will tend to focus on, uh,
and child material hardship.
Um, the sad reality is that child material
hardship is very widely spread.
Um, the acute presentation of other forms
of disadvantage is potentially not quite as widely spread.
And so social investment will tend
to focus on a wide range of disadvantage.
Uh, so, you know, thinking about children who are vulnerable
to family violence or to, um, child protection issues.
Um, so naturally it goes towards part
of the population experiencing material hardship.
Um, and it goes generally to try
to get better impact from total government spend,
which allows, uh, that spend to go further,
hopefully in ways that will lift material hardship.
But, but there's a broader picture here, which is what,
what is the macro environment
that sees some families experiencing, um, that that hardship
and, and that is a little bit beyond
That. Do you accept that you
may be putting the cart
before the horse in the sense that addressing these,
you know, to your, in your words, its advantages,
it's made harder if material hardship is persistent?
It definitely is, but they, they're,
they're in a cyclical relationship.
So, um, a child who, uh,
disengages early from school, maybe
because of a, as a result of an unsafe environment unable
to learn or, or some other disability is less likely
to go on to further education
and employment, which makes them more likely to suffer, uh,
to, to be, um, I suppose an adult in a family
where there's material hardship.
Um, and then for the next generation to experience that.
So you, you have to break a cycle somewhere.
Yes, it would be great to be able
to solve all material hardship
that would make a massive difference to social outcomes.
Um, but the, the focus for social investment is,
is really saying, um, what can we do to try
and shift that cycle of disadvantage?
And that that's why we would tend to gravitate towards, um,
families where we are seeing a range
of other outcomes also present.
I have a further up, but I'll Yeah. Uh, will I, I will.
Sorry.
Um, Andrew, I'm interested in your, um, relationship
with Maori groups at the moment.
What, who have you been, uh, working with mm-hmm.
And we tribal since mm-hmm.
And also in terms of whanau water, are there, uh,
some learnings there?
Uh, is that, uh, being factored in,
in terms of the whole strategy?
Yeah. Um, in terms of whanau water, obviously, um,
whanau water is one of the stronger examples of
enabling community-based delivery that responds
to whanau need
and actually engages whanau aspiration, uh, so
that it's not just a, a, a doing two,
but it's actually an up an uplifting.
Um, and so whanau water is a really good example of,
um, a method of delivery that looks to be effective.
Uh, and we would see, um, benefit from more delivery
that has that flexibility.
Whanau water has traditionally been quite an open door,
so anyone can kind of engage with whanau water support.
You might argue in that sense that it's not as targeted
as it could be towards families experience.
The greatest disadvantage
and some of the recent changes to farm water have been about
trying to achieve that stronger, um, focusing
where this particular deprivation, um, in terms of working
with Maori, generally what we see out there in terms
of delivery is that organizations well able
to connect with the people experiencing disadvantage are
going to get these results.
And we see a lot of, uh, strong delivery through, um,
kapa Maori iwi organizations working
with people in communities.
Uh, we are having conversations with a wide range
of people and organizations.
Um, and clearly there's a very strong, um,
Kiwi Maori interest in what social investment is trying
to do, not least of all,
because it enables, um, greater local agency about
what it is that will make the difference
for the people rather than, you know,
Wellington making up a policy and,
and prescribing it through a very tight service
specification, which is what we tend to do at the moment.
Um, one of the conversations under social investment
that is, um, even more forward-leaning in this space is
community commissioning.
So what does it look like to have local input to
the way services are commissioned?
Um, bringing a understanding of local need, uh,
and bringing an understanding of local capability, you know,
the organizations that will be most effective.
Um, we've had some really interesting discussions, um,
not just with Iwi, but uh, with local government,
with community trusts.
And, um, and when you look around the country, you see, uh,
places where it's not just the families
who are doing poorly, it's the whole place
that's doing poorly.
And that kind of speaks to the need to respond to, um,
the place in a pretty holistic way.
So what's the alignment between local government investment,
maybe in community infrastructure,
between government investment, social services,
philanthropic investment, potentially iwi or
or other community group investment?
Um, and, and how do you make a plan for the places
that aren't naturally, um, coming, right.
As, as a result of other wider efforts?
And are we, in terms of devolvement, is, uh, uh, uh,
what sort of point are we at there?
Do you think the government is, uh, vested in that?
Is, is are the government, are we go,
are we on track in terms of, uh, you know,
significant devolvement rather than just, uh, you know, uh,
uh, small, small amount of, uh, going to,
to organizations?
Is the government on track in terms of real investment
with regards to devolvement to Maori organizations? Mm-hmm.
Ministers signaled, our minister has signaled a, um,
pathway around community commissioning as one of the,
that's one of the options in the fund
that has been approved by cabinet.
And we're at the stage now
of testing what that could look like.
Um, ministers have yet to take
decisions on the exec shape of that.
Um, and those, uh, you know, our advice will be,
those decisions will need to be, um, shaped around, um,
how we grow our understanding of what good looks like here,
because, um, clearly there's a need
for ongoing accountability
around the way public money is spent.
Um, equally, we shouldn't walk past opportunities
to get better impact for that.
So I think that's where some of the, um,
the issues are that we need to work through.
Just, uh, I've gotta stop, introduce a point you made
around, um, that partnership, um, working with
local government sector and philanthropic sector.
Uh, like what's the best way for them to engage
with your agency?
Yeah. 'cause I, I, I, I'm aware that there's,
there's actually quite a lot of interest in this space.
There is, and we've had a lot of engagement.
Uh, really anyone who's reached out out to us
for conversations in that space.
We've been, we've been open.
Um, one of the things we hear from philanthropy is a desire
to, um, invest in innovation, uh,
but then not to end up long-term funding services
that are delivering value for government,
because surely that's government should fund that.
So, um, you know, we are not,
government's not particularly easy for philanthropics
to engage with.
We, we do have quite a strong anchor in status quo.
And so working out what, what the pathway is
that could allow someone to come forward
and say, you know, we are interested to invest in this area,
um, is if this innovation was successful, is it something
that that government would, um, be open to funding
or building into universal service
delivery, uh, in the future?
We, we have basically told,
I might go a little bit, little bit over quickly.
I'm really interested in the stuff
and I'd love to have a extra conversation.
Um, but my sub on that is when I'm talking to, um,
the community of charities and philanthropy
and I look at overseas
and I see some of the amazing stuff that's being done.
They tell me that, that the actual number
of philanthropists here is, is smaller
and it's, it's not as strong, um, uh, a source.
Is that your reckon? Do you think we can grow that?
Do you think that that is a very valid part of
what you are trying to grapple with?
Yeah. Have we got the settings right?
We don't have the same, um, big foundations
that you see in places like the United States,
but there are lots of, um, people out there
who are interested to invest philanthropically.
Uh, and we haven't yet got the settings right in terms of
how we best enable that to occur.
Uh, you know, particularly in this area of, of enabling, um,
them to invest,
but then if it works for government to be able to, um,
carry on with that so that
that capital can be reinvested into other innovation.
Mm-hmm. Um, and that, that's probably the thing we hear,
we hear most strongly.
Thank you. Thank you. Um, thank you.
Um, I'm not quite sure how to, um, articulate my question.
The, um, the measures that we've got for poverty, um,
material, um, obviously,
but there are other aspects to living a good life
that are not quite so tangible.
And some of those things, as you touched on
before, child living school early
because they're not safe at home.
And, and, um, and,
and on one of our social services committee, um, visits,
we actually heard about research where particularly
with young people, their most important thing was
to be safe.
Everything else flowed from that mm-hmm.
So how do you anticipate,
or do you anticipate the social investment agency looking at
those intangibles, those things that are not quite
as material, um, but equally as important?
Yeah, and I, I I think when you talked about philanthropy,
I, you know, I could see that there's an avenue there
where maybe sport or arts or other cultural things Yeah.
Can fill that space. Do you have a, a view on that?
Yeah, uh, definitely.
I mean, we, there are quite, there are a lot
of indicators in the IDI that point us towards, um,
places where things might not be quite right and,
and probably beyond the threshold of not just feeling safe,
but actually being safe.
Uh, so that's, that's the starting point.
Um, and we know the strong correlation between those things
and, for example, uh, future youth offending
or, um, you know, other, other more outcomes.
So a lot of our analysis focuses in that space.
Um, and, you know, to the, the points I've made, how,
how you sort of, um, better enable community delivery
to support generational change in families
where maybe those sorts of challenges persist.
Um, there's definitely a place for a wide range
of different investments.
You know, we know, uh, that for example, the provision of,
um, sports facilities
and the community can provide, um, you know,
with the right adult supervision a, a great place
for young people to be who
for whom it's not safe to be at home.
So all of those things are really, um, valid, harder
to measure in terms of impact, of course.
But there is a lot of good work that's done outside
of government to enable those sorts of things,
Because I don't, I'm not sure if we even measure
contentment or happiness.
Um, you know, and I think about my grandparents with very
modest, you know, living arrangements and 13 kids mm-hmm.
But extremely happy and still are to this day.
Um, that's why I've got 40 something cousins.
Um, but, um,
but those things are equally as important
that we don't measure them
or we don't ask people about their contentment.
We assume the material hardship is the thing
that we can address be.
Yeah. I, it's true that a lot of what government holds,
as in indicators, are deficit measures
because it's usually when something goes wrong that
that engagement with government is triggered.
It's a little bit harder to know when things are going well.
Um, but we do know, uh, that there's not an absolute link
between, um, material hardship and,
and other really negative social outcomes.
But there's a type correlation that,
that we can't apply. Yeah.
Take the opportunities. I ask the very last question, um,
is that one of interesting, me having worked in courts
and prisons as a lawyer from Auckland to Cargill
and, um, rough up to 70% of people in prison, uh,
just thinkers, you know, moves around a little bit and,
and I dunno, these precise figures of those who come
through the court system, but my experience is very high.
Um, there's a lot of dyslexic thinkers. Mm.
Um, and there's a lot of complexities in their
background, but it's a commonality.
Mm-hmm. Um, dyslexic thinking though, is seen by the,
you know, the big tech companies globally as,
as a skillset set they look for.
Mm. Because it's that kind of thinking that is actually,
you know, can, can make their companies very successful.
So we are putting, we we're seeing a lot
of these people ending up in our prison system.
And, and I, I applaud the, the three things
that you are focusing on, but is that something that's,
that you are looking at as well through the IDI measures?
Yeah. We, I've just experientially seen it a
lot, quite across the
Country. Yeah. Uh,
as well as the things we are doing
through the fund, we have a, an important role, um, sort of
with the rest of government understanding where
you could shift approaches that could lead
to better outcomes and
supporting agencies to have those insights.
And obviously, um, something like that would be a question
of where in the education system, um, can you identify
a student struggling for that reason and,
and provide a different approach.
And, and if you can deploy that successfully
and get a better outcome,
that's a great example of social investment.
Mm-hmm. Um, you know, clearly we, we are not experts in,
in everything, but it is our job to try
and influence agencies to be
not just applying a one size fits all approach
to the populations that they serve.
And that would be great example of it.
Well, thank you much for your time.
Thank you.